is that what I want in my temperature, what I want for drying is the opposite of what I want for my fermentation.
So in my fermentation, I want really consistent temperature. I want my temperature to stay the same.
For my lactic, I wanted it to be 25, but we had them in a little bucket, so in the day it was hotter, and at night it was colder.
colder. And that temperature swing in my fermentation is really is a problem
because if I have this like strong temperature change then I'm potentially
upsetting my bacteria or my yeast and opening up a window for another bacteria
or yeast to take over. So any temperature change is like opening a window for
like something else to come through.
(dog barking)
(speaking in foreign language)
Come on, guys, we're so close.
Silence.
I don't actually want to go longer.
I want to learn about drying.
I just want to tell you about it.
And for drying, so again for fermentation I want stable temperatures, but for drying
I really want that break.
For good drying I want the heat of the day, I want the rest at night, I want the heat
of the day, I want the rest at night.
So opposite goals for temperature.
And in drying, this change is really important.
And this is kind of the myth of why sun drying is superior to mechanical drying.
I think we're hearing a lot of that.
This is sun dried like it's more better.
And not because there's something inherently magical about the sun.
I think it has to do with these breaks in temperature that allow the coffee to dry more
evenly.
So, what we want, like we want this rhythm.
So this is just a graphic of a seed that is completely permeated with water.
And if you have continuous drying, we're only drying the outside, we're drying the surface.
And if it's too fast, the drying from the outside is not keeping up with the time it
it takes for the water inside to migrate to the surface.
So you could be inadvertently trapping water
inside your coffee, versus if you have a rest,
you dry the outside, you let some of them come in,
and then you dry the outside again,
'cause you're only ever drying the outside.
You're not drying from the inside out.
So what happens a lot of the time is that
coffee that is this will read perfect.
Your moisture content of this can read at 11% or 10.5%,
you've got this water trapped in there.
So when you put it on a container ship
and someone gets it six months later, your coffee's changed.
And then you get these arguments of like,
well, you didn't send me the coffee
that you said you were going to send.
Or this doesn't match the pre-shipment sample.
And it could have to do a lot with the drying.
So if you have these breaks, you have more confidence
that your coffee is going to stay the way
that you intend for it to stay.
So I'd like to show this picture.
So this is a mill that I worked at in Rwanda.
This little corner here, that little triangle, or rectangle, is the mill.
That is all of their tank space they have.
And this is how much drying space they have for that amount of tank space.
The drying is always the bottleneck.
So I think it's really frustrating when producers are told you should sun dry because it may
not be physically possible, even if they have sun, to have this much physical space to sun
dry.
Especially, I mean, you saw here in Columbia, where are you going to find flat space to
sun dry anything?
Okay.
Okay, so a lot of the times there's not enough space to dry even if you did have
like here we also don't even have the Sun that much we have constant rain and
lots of clouds.
Matt?
How much? I mean for the meter?
So this range of 12 to 30 kilos of parchment per meter like that's why we
need a lot of space and this is actually on the high end. So I'm on a very
practical end. I've seen some other recommendations that are low as like
five kilos of parchment, like one being thick to have. For me, I'm just like
that's asking a lot. So I try to be a little bit more reasonable. Like my
recommendations are, like I said, high on the higher end.
That's like one ton at a time, right?
Yeah.
So like your whole production could be five tons but sequentially one ton at a time.
of time. It's essentially one time at a time. For here, because it all comes in at once, they need
all of this space to dry. Here, and I'll show you, I think I have it. So it's got a longer drying
time, so you could be more exact. Exactly, and that's why they have all that space that I just
showed you. This is the same place. And they have this, they were building this to have even more
drying space so that they could slow down their drying even more. So this was for full shade
drying so that they could hit like five weeks of drying. And then here you can
see the coffee is covered in case it does rain so they do have a little bit
of protection. So that's what's inside these vats.
And when you say five weeks, what is that improving?
What is that improving? So I think it's still this myth that if slower is better,
or just like our human nature, like if a little is good, more is better. So if slow
drying or natural drying is good, then if I just extend it as long as possible, then
that should be even better. Not understanding microbial risks, not
understanding mold growth, not understanding water activity, which we're
about to talk about. So I think it's a little bit misguided to think that we
need to dry our coffee that slow, that long. I think there's also a little bit
more like confusion and misinformation about UV, saying that like the UV is
like harmful to the seed and so they want to dry completely in shade like in
the dark. I don't think there's good evidence of that.
And so here you can see the structure being used. So there you, I mean it's a lot of
coffee that they process in this facility but they still require a lot of
space. These are stationary. We talked in the other group about some that rotate.
I've seen Ferris wheel with coffee that kind of has some movement.
For me, those machines are a lot of infrastructure for not that much drying space.
If you actually look at the beds that they hold, it's not a lot.
So, because of this, I'm a huge, huge fan of mechanical drying.
I think mechanical dryers are fantastic and you can create really great, high-quality coffee in a mechanical dryer.
We've just been using the tool wrong.
We've been using the tool as a full force,
really consistent drying machine.
So in sun, you really can't hurry up the sun.
It has to be night.
There will always be night.
So you have built in breaks, built in rests.
But with the machine, there's no breaks.
So coffee producers are drying their coffee in 60 hours
at 70 degrees, like you're basically pre-cooking.
And then everyone's like, oh, machines are the worst.
And machine coffees are-- machine-dried coffees
are going to give you low-quality coffee, which
we saw, yes, because it bursts all your structures,
your oils come out, your volatiles come out,
and yes, the coffee's worse.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
So using our machines to mimic nature,
lowering the temperature, giving those positives,
is an opportunity to have really high-quality coffee
with machines and not sacrifice quality.
So the other things that can be
like something to keep in mind, again,
not everybody has the space to sub-dry,
so machine may be your only option.
And asking somebody to have a machine that works 24 hours
and only to turn it on for four or six,
I get a lot of pushback of like,
but I bought it so that I could dry very quickly.
And I'm not gonna, my machine should be running 24 hours
and you're only asking me to run it four,
like that's really inefficient.
So what I tell producers is you can run it 24 hours
just with different coffee.
So run it for eight hours with one batch,
switch out your coffee, do that for eight hours
and then switch out your coffee.
So you can dry three coffees, never stop your machine,
but you're still giving the coffee those breaks.
So you can still run it full,
it's still a slightly lower temperature.
- But there are no commercial mechanical dryers
that are focusing on efficiency
in a more day-night kind of cycle
that you're talking about.
They're all meant to be run long periods of time.
- Yeah, they're all like,
and the other kind of drawback to mechanical drying
is that especially with the Guardiola,
they're most efficient at full volume.
So they're really like one unit machines
because the coffee that goes in here, so this will rotate.
And if there's not enough coffee,
you don't get enough of that rotation.
So you need to fill it to like 85% capacity to run it fast.
You can't just have a little bit of coffee
that I need to dry.
So that's, drawback to the Guardiola,
I really like this type of dryer though
because the heat is coming from the middle out.
So it's like multi-directional, really even heat
and you're rotating very slowly.
So you have that evenness compared to the,
another really common system here in Colombia is a silo.
So it's like a tall column,
and the heat is only coming from the bottom,
kind of pushing up, so there's no agitation.
But people like it because it has multiple compartments.
So you can put your wettest coffee at the bottom,
and then when it dries, you can kind of move it up,
and then your most dry coffee goes at the top,
so you have less heat coming towards it.
But I still feel like that creates a lot of opportunity
for inconsistency because you're not moving the coffee.
It's just coffee coming from the bottom, kind of through it.
And--
But Guardiola is the style where it's like a spinning drum.
Yeah.
So different companies make Guardiolas.
So Pinalencia will make a Guardiola.
Penergos would make a Guardiola.
So yeah, Guardiola is the style, not the company
that makes them.
And I think they're kind of becoming more savvy to this,
that they're making them with multiple compartments
so that you can dry different batches of coffee
in the same machine and you're not having to load and unload
as much, so they're getting better as well.
Compartmentalizing it then like this way, like vertically.
I'm not sure if the compartments are like in the cylinder,
like kind of half and half or that way.
But yeah, just.
- If it's a hundred kilo,
right, they have a divide,
so you can make it a 50 kilo
if you don't have enough coffee to fill the hundred.
- Yeah.
- Okay, I have to jump back a little bit to fermentation
because it's like we have roasting in drums,
we have drying in drums.
- Why are we fermenting in drums?
- We have full agitation in drums.
- That's what I would love.
I would love, like if I can have a gordiello
without the holes and ferment in that,
or I'd mention like a cement mixer,
like something that has that soft--
- So it's not like, that doesn't disturb microbes
too much or anything like that?
- Not the ones that I use.
So I would like that really well with the yeast.
It could be that you have a microbe
that's more delicate to agitation and wouldn't like that,
wouldn't want to constantly be disturbed,
or you may wanna preserve some kind of environment.
So I don't think it's the best for everything,
but I think it would be really, really good for the yeast.
And also like a slow rotation.
Very slow.
But that would create more consistency and...
And less work for Sebastiano to like be constantly...
Yeah, moving.
What did you think about the touchpad?
So this is one of these static dryers.
That...
Again, like, it's a tool.
So I don't think any tool is good or bad.
It's like how do you use it.
So you can see that has the multiple compartments so that you can have different batches and
so that the heat is coming from the bottom so this one is getting hotter than this one.
Yeah.
What about the moisture which is like going through the... yeah I don't love it.
Well, for example, so in Ecuador, they start by drying in the sun.
And then at around like 2018 or something in the winter,
they start using the mechanical dryer.
But they have like some--
I don't like that.
I don't recommend that.
So it's very, very common a lot of the times to start in the sun
and then switch to machine.
I think that's--
I don't like to say anything is wrong.
Because it depends how you use it.
But for me, I don't think that's a good way to dry coffee.
I like to flip it.
Because the sun, you have these automatic breaks of pausing because it's night time.
And the machines, they tend to be run really hot.
So the error that I see most people do is they start in the sun where it's more gentle.
And then they get like impatient.
And they just want the coffee to dry or they run out of time.
And then they put it in the machine when the coffee is the most brutal and it has a higher temperature.
So then they end up damaging their coffee at the end.
So I would flip it. I would machine dry first when you have your highest moisture
so that you have the most buffer, the most resistance, like the coffee is the most resilient.
Machine dry first and then if you don't have enough space, then go to the sun where you have more gentle drying.
or you can take more time.
But don't you think that this is what happens, you seal this moisture
with really excessive heat in the machine at the beginning?
Because this is the same as what you just mentioned,
it's the same as the roasting,
you just put it at a really high temperature,
it will just seal all this moisture from the inside, and basically...
Well, I still don't ever recommend high temperatures in your machine.
You should still never be doing that.
But at that point, especially because we know water doesn't evenly come off,
like doesn't it, the least tightly bound water comes off first. So you still have that buffer
and then later on it takes more effort to unbind that water. So for me in the beginning it is the
most readily available. So it's not going to be trapped inside. You still need to get that free
water.
[dog barking]
It's very difficult to find a small dry.
So what you do is you keep piping, keep drying, and building your volume until you can fill
up the mechanical dry.
So it's almost impossible for you to mechanical dry first.
You do it first.
And then you just control, so at night you turn off the heat, but leave it turning.
And every day you turn on that to heat.
So, you're pretending to be the sun.
You're pretending to be the sun, that's the point. Yeah, you're mimicking nature.
And you keep it, keep it lower than you would normally.
So, instead of 40, maybe you keep it at 20, or 30.
Yeah.
So that could work.
Yes.
[DOG BARKING]
[INAUDIBLE]
[WHISTLE BLOWING]
[DOG BARKING]
[INAUDIBLE]
[LAUGHTER]
Is it that the hot air [INAUDIBLE]
because you should have your coffee on the bench rather than tea.
The, the...
It's hard to do...
Are you talking about in a machine or on a bed?
Yeah, no, on the bench.
If it's really hot, rather than tea, you can split up.
If you get tipped, then just...
Sure.
Keep turning it or breaking it down.
Exactly.
Oh, that, I mean, that's the other thing.
If you think about how many people it takes to...
I mean, and these coffees are moved every hour.
Is that right?
Yes. So I have pictures and they just have a hundred people just moving coffee.
Doing nothing else. Just move coffee all day long.
And so, like, in the nature, like...
It's a lot of work.
[Dog barking]
(dog barking)
- Okay, go ahead.
- So, nature's awesome, but like,
why is it again, that like, why does that cycle?
- The cycle matters.
- Is it, we're talking about just for storage,
or for longevity?
- Yeah.
- It gives a chance for the water inside
to migrate to the outside. - Mostly.
- Okay, so it's migrating. - Right, so the break
is important for this, for give the water enough time
from the inner layer and the inner tissue layers
to migrate to the outside and to not trap water
because any water that you trap inside
is water that's available for a reaction.
It's water that's available to change your coffee.
- When you store your coffee, you rehydrate your coffee.
- Okay, and so like, at first, it's all kind of
available because it's all kind of together,
so it's not like sealed off on the outside,
so it's all kind of moving.
And then you're ensuring that then
whatever has the outer form, then it cools
and allows that then to disperse out again.
- Exactly.
- Okay, so you're allowing the water
to continue to come out.
- To continually come out, yes.
Exactly.
You're allowing the water to continually come out,
like to catch up.
So it takes a, it's not super well understood
how water is coming out.
There's some capillary action, there's some diffusion,
there's like, there's a lot of methods
and however tightly bound the water is for it to come out,
but it takes time.
So if we're drying at a faster rate
that we're letting that action happen,
that's when the trapping happens.
- So it's not necessarily a day-night cycle,
it's just that somehow that has to happen.
- Yeah.
- It has to occur.
- Where we are down, 'cause up in the mountain
we can't dry anything, it's just always so humid.
So down in the valley, it's really hot, really sunny,
kind of a little hotter than this.
So we actually have to take it a step further
and dry every other day.
- Give it a bigger break.
- So the first few days we'll dry every day
to get most of the water out.
And then, yeah, then from about,
once the moisture's down to 25, 30,
we'll dry every other,
to where there's no danger of mold or,
like the honey process,
we might get a little down to 20 or so.
But then the last week or so,
where they go cover and uncover every other day,
just to give it a chance to be even out.
Yeah, exactly what you're saying.
Yeah, and there's nothing magical about like 12 and 12 hours.
If you need 24 and 24 or longer breaks,
it's just having that opportunity for the inner moisture to catch up.
And what Renata was asking was,
if I'm recommending machine first and then sun,
which is usually the opposite,
traditionally it's sun first and then we're impatient,
just put it in the machine and get it out of here.
If I'm recommending the opposite of machine first,
she's saying, well, am I not creating the conditions
I'm trying to avoid?
If I'm putting it in the machine first,
aren't I trapping, making kind of like a crust
on the outside?
And I'm saying, no, because I still never wanna run
the machine that hot.
I still never recommend it to run the machine that hot
that that happens.
And in the beginning, getting the temperature,
getting the moisture down at least to that low 25% and like that to go quickly is very
important for stability and to prevent microbial growth.
So I do want to go much faster in the beginning because I have way more free water that is
going to come off and that is the point where the seed is the most robust, is the most protected.
That water gives it that opportunity to take a little bit more energy and not get brittle
and get hurt.
So I would rather get through those 25% as quickly as possible without putting it at
70 Celsius.
Still trying to maintain a reasonable amount of heat, but getting there quickly.
And then from 20 to 12, I can take a lot more of my time, let it stabilize, homogenize,
the moisture that's inside, but I've lowered, I've reduced my risk of microbial activity
significantly.
I think it also can depend on if you use the cherry as a final product to try, or parchment,
because in a way with the cherry I think you can start even higher and with the parchment lower.
Because this is also like cut away with the roasting, washed coffee, I don't know,
after you finish washed coffee you can just dump it at like crazy temperatures and it will be fine in the beginning,
You don't want to really seal it, but with a natural it's very more fragile.
So with a natural you want to get slightly lower when you insert the instant jump.
So maybe this is also the case, like for you to go slightly lower if you're on the cherry,
then you just can't afford yourself to go a bit higher.
Because again, what you say, there is extra work to do.
That makes sense. I just don't work with naturals.
I don't work with cherries, so I don't give recommendations on cherries.
on cherries, but yes, that makes sense.
Can you put the cherries in the baguette mold?
Yeah, you can.
And that's the only place where you do have to do sun first
to get it dry enough of water so that you can put them
into the machine because you're just
going to corrode your machine.
But it's an option that a lot of producers have to use.
Is there any magic temperature number to not form a crust
so that any rust afterwards would still happen?
Well, we talked about above 40 Celsius,
and you start to see that cellular damage.
But that has to do with cellular integrity, not necessarily
forming a crust.
So I think the crust has more to do
with the rate of drying on the outside
to rate of water coming out from the inside.
And so that ratio.
So it's more of that ratio versus the temperature.
But it's not a permanent crust though, right?
Because you could rest long enough to catch up.
I mean, compared to the--
Exactly.
it's not a permanent crust, which is a problem
because it's not a permanent crust.
So a producer gets their coffee and then it says 11.5%
I'm golden, they put it on a container ship,
it's not a permanent crust, that starts to migrate out.
And then when the coffee arrives, it's at 13.
And then they say, this is not what I ordered.
- What do you think of the opposite?
- No.
- What do you think?
- Because they're on?
- Yeah, it's like, I don't know,
[ Inaudible ]
>> Something that can happen in the container, I mean, we saw a metal container.
>> To get dry.
>> Yeah. We saw if you're on a metal container, like, you can get very hot.
And so yes, you could.
Also the thing is, again, it depends on what is your route,
what is your final destination.
For example, what we just heard, on the ship Ethiopia,
Netherlands, back in days it had to stop like four times in the different ports.
And then it depends on where you can sit on the ship and in the port.
So if you're in the middle or in the bottom, you probably will be good.
But if you're like in Egypt and Cairo,
with like 45 degree outside,
and you're containing the coffee seed like on a really tough,
you might get a bit gross at coffee when you realize.
- Yeah, because what I saw in France,
when they are like shipping the containers,
a lot of these devices were taken to track
the moisture, temperature, and how was it behaving
- Yeah.
- during the...
- But it depends, I think, how...
- I mean, I'm shocked that that's not done with coffee.
It's crazy that it's not standard practices.
Like, you can put your coffee on a container, which you were saying,
it can stop four times and fourths, be on the top level in this metal box, melting,
and exporters and importers are not putting in temperature tracking devices.
Coffee just arrives, and a lot of times the producer gets blamed for shipping not what was supposed to be there,
not considering the route that the coffee had to take. It's bonkers.
Do importers and exporters have any say on where on the ship something goes?
Or can you pay more for it?
Like, I want this.
No, no, no.
This is a sub-famous coffee that she sells.
It's like Big Mafia.
There is like three international companies on the ship.
Oh, I don't know.
98% of the transportation.
No, he said in Kenya.
Not the Mansiun coffee in India.
in India.
- Maybe that's it.
I'll look it up.
- Okay.
But that's still during the processing.
It's not after it's dried.
- No, no, this is unroofed.
- Oh, I've never heard of this.
- So you can use the bean, cracked is an indicator that it's too hot.
- Being a parchment?
- Yeah, if it starts to split, you know, you need to cover or reduce the heat or...
It's a good indicator, yeah?
- I think it depends.
I mean, I don't know.
I mean, I don't know if it's a good indicator.
indicator that it's too hot.
You mean the parchment?
Yeah, if it starts to split, you know you need to cover or reduce the heat or...
It's a good indicator, yeah?
It depends. I think that I've seen it both ways.
So we're talking about when you see the parchment kind of split open and crack.
It could be that we know that water expands if it's heated way too much and too quickly.
It could be that the inner seed expands and cracks the parchment.
But I think it could also be like a nutrient deficiency,
something in the field where the parchment just didn't get very thick.
Do you have some insight?
I think it's because the parchment will dehydrate a lot quicker than the coffee
seed. And so the parchment is trying to shrink from being dehydrated,
but the seed is still the same size. The seed isn't shrinking with it.
And so it's like suddenly the parchment is two sizes too small.
I think that's, yeah.
But that's not good for the coffee.
It's not good for the coffee, no.
So that's part of that rest and that gentleness.
Like I think we could be a lot more gentle with our drying.
- But having said that,
when I first take it off after washing,
I find the more you do better until it's dry touch.
Once it's dry touch, cover it big time.
- Yes, exactly.
- Don't let it go one second past dry touch.
- Exactly, because it's, well, you're very strict.
I want you to like relax a little bit.
(laughing)
- Yeah, so getting it dry with water,
like just that, when you wash it,
that touch dry, that free water,
yes, do that as quickly as possible.
And we did that, we put it in full midday sun here,
trying to dry it to the touch.
But you're right, once it is dry to the touch,
you have this disparity,
you have these two different tissues
that are gonna dry out at different times.
And if you don't give it that rest,
then you crack your parchment,
And once your parchment is cracked, that really affects your longevity.
You don't have that protected layer for the next six months.
Yeah, absolutely.
So would a cracked parchment sometimes be a potential indicator of uneven drying,
or at least that the moisture might be trapped in the inside?
I think so.
Or just that maybe it was a little too strong in the beginning?
No.
In this case, like stations, you see it a lot when producers or stations or exporters try to try the first year to make a washed coffee.
This we actually saw this year from Dalvik's coffee.
So he just built his washing station and I mean like Pernod Gros was completely like super dirty and ruined because they didn't really calibrate it.
But anyway, so they just place it on the beds straight away
and you can see how cracked the parchment is
because they didn't have, on that specific station,
they didn't have any shade at all.
So I mean, it's not really great also for the naturals,
but for the wasps, it's not crucial since it's like.
- Yeah, that's a good point.
So if they were only used to doing cherries
when you have so many protective layers
and the cherries need so much more moisture
and take longer to dry,
and then treating your parchment exactly like your cherry,
they were cracking those tissues.
- Also, the mucilager, like on the EcoPulp,
that really wrecks your parchment.
- Yeah.
- 'Cause it's like, just really trying
to get the mucilage off,
and your parchment is thin and useless.
- Yeah, I really agree.
So a lot of times, when people learn that,
when I show them like all of the tissue layers,
and say what you really want is to get into your seed,
and you wanna remove these layers,
and we talk about these multi-step,
of what if I just run it through my EcoPulp,
or remove the mucilage, and then soak it
in something.
And for me, it's like, yes, that's creative.
But you beat up your coffee so much
that I think what you gain in complexity,
you are reducing in just sheer force
and shattering your coffee and making it.
So I wouldn't do that.
But if we could find a more gentle-- like your enzymes
that you mentioned, maybe the citric acid,
a gentler way to remove the mucilage
and then soak the coffee.
Maybe does, like if you have the option of drying
where maybe mold isn't a danger,
having that mucilage on there
might not be so bad of an idea.
'Cause that mucilage will kind of coat your parchment
and glue it together a little bit
and also protect it from too quick of drying.
'Cause it adds, so instead of your mucilage
being like a fishnet,
your mucilage is more like a plastic cup, you know,
so it slows down the drying a little bit.
So we notice with honeys and stuff, sometimes we get slower drying times, but also more
even drying.
We can tell when we roast it.
It's easy.
The roasting, you can see a lot of times when the drying is even or uneven.
So if we're done with our fermentation and there's still mucilage, we'll just dry it
because we want that.
There's nothing wrong with mucilage.
For us, honey coffee is much harder to scoop.
So I like that, as a producer, to say you're doing a honey process to protect your drying
and not necessarily to get some sweetness or something like that.
It's being able to look at these tools and saying what you're using it for.
So you're not doing it for your competition lot or to put something interesting on the label.
So a lot of the benefit from the honey could be not the fermentation but the protective
nature.
It's pretty cool.
Can I also have a question?
Yeah.
What do you think about removing the parchment from lower altitude and higher altitude?
If you're on the lower altitude, you have parchment, but if you're on the higher altitude,
you have more humidity and they don't get as strong?
I've never seen it work well.
We always had a problem with the parchment.
We had a problem with the parchment.
I've never seen it work well. We always want to take coffee lower because of the heat.
Yeah, it's good. But for example, there was one guy in Ecuador and he needed coffee from his farm in New York.
He couldn't because he was too high and he was super drunk.
So it's able to dry it, you know.
Great.
But like the air pressure doesn't make sense.
Is there like anything that could be like that in this situation?
No, my only consideration like if it was at the lower elevation just too humid and you
had trouble and then you took it higher elevation, drier air and I mean that I've never, not
never, if that makes sense, but like I've never worked with anyone that needed to do
that, they had to take it higher, and you usually have to take it lower. But if this
works for him because the air has less moisture and he's able to dry it, my only
consideration is like that cost of transporting multiple times. And again,
every time we're moving the coffee is an opportunity to physically damage it. So
the more steps that a coffee has, those are more like touch points for potential
damage. I don't know how big the lot is. It could be...
Small.
Right, so if it was a larger lot and you're putting it on a truck and you have all
that pressure and you're driving it on these bumpy roads for whatever, five hours to get
there, unloading the coffee, loading it back up, like, I think what you could potentially
gain from better drying, you might lose again in like beating up your coffee.
Yeah?
>> [INDISTINCT]
>> Okay.
So, I'm going to go back to you.
>> [INDISTINCT]
[INAUDIBLE]
I'll get back to you.
OK.
[LAUGHTER]
I'll get back to you.
So I just wanted to show you guys
how difficult it was to dry the coffee that we
tried on Wednesdays.
It was drying at our house.
These were the vents.
And one of the things that I-- and so because it was just
wet, it took us like seven weeks to dry this coffee
at our house.
It was a long time.
It was a lot of effort.
So what we did is, I didn't have a humidity meter at the time,
so I took a little corner, so this set aside corner of the bed.
We weighed the coffee, and I was monitoring my drying by weight.
So we started with a sample, and because we used our coffee scale,
my sample couldn't be that big. I would love to do like 5 kilos.
Like the bigger the sample, the better.
So I'm just using weight, so it's 1900 grams,
and then 1500, and then 1430,
like I'm slowly losing moisture
because our coffee is water and coffee matter,
and dry matter.
So if I'm weighing it and it's losing weight,
it's more likely it's water than I'm losing coffee mass,
unless I'm doing something really, really wrong.
So this is just like a nice check
because a lot of times,
I'll let you do that.
[SOUND]
>> That is the only vehicle that we can take to our house.
So that is like, when Nick and I go grocery shopping,
we have to call a local to bring us down from the mountain or to take us back.
>> Why?
>> Because the roads are so bad that we need a large vehicle.
>> A roof?
>> Yes. >> Great.
>> [LAUGH]
So he's our driver for everything.
Anyway, so we didn't have a moisture meter.
We're using weight.
And I've seen a lot of producers get really tripped up
with the moisture meter.
If they're drying their coffee and they're checking the moisture
content, a lot of the times I think
they falsely think that the moisture's coming back up.
Like, you do it at night, maybe it's at 17,
and then you check it the next morning, and it's at 19.
and then they're like, "Oh my God, we brought on moisture,"
maybe the dew, and they get really concerned,
and then they start to over-dry their coffee,
or it just creates a lot of panic and activity.
What I think is more likely happening
is that overnight, over those 17 hours,
the moisture that was inside did come to the surface,
and then we're able to, the rays,
The jump in moisture content is just a good thing.
Where a lot of the times producers are like panicked
that they did something wrong,
instead of no, the process is working.
So I like to tell them just use the weight
and if your weight is dropping,
even if your moisture content went up, trust your weight.
Like a scale is a very solid instrument
because these moisture humidity meters
can get out of calibration very easily, very quickly.
So to trust this number and then make a decision on this number.
So one of the things that happened in the farm that I was at is they kept saying this.
At night it would be low and then the next day or the next measurement would be high.
So they were like, "Okay, we're screwing up."
So what they did with their tunnels is they completely covered them in plastic
and then underneath the tunnel, like a parabolic tunnel,
underneath they hooked it up with light bulbs
So that during the night they could heat the coffee and avoid yeah, exactly. I saw this and I was like, oh no
So they were they put light bulbs underneath so that again expensive because it's electricity it took them
time to like create these structures and
Then they were making the coffee quality worse because they just wanted to see that number drop
And so when I had them use a scale it was like
They were fine. Like it was what you wanted to have it. So be careful of your of your instruments
Can you is there a calculation you can do with?
Initial weight to there to like actually get a percentage
So in our cherry we're mostly water right because we still have all of that other tissue there
We have the best when we get to parchment and we're just dry from the touch
It's a guess that we're about 45% water to dry matter
this is just like a general like it'll depend on your variety but it's a pretty good starting point
so if i know like masomenos if i know about my water i'm starting with like here super wet coffee
that i let just dry to the touch and i'm assuming that's 45 and then i just want to know how much
dry batter so 1914 was just the sample that was able to fit on my scale because it was a coffee
scale so I couldn't get quite two kilos. So that's just what I started with
multiplying by my dry matter. So I know that about a thousand
grams is dry coffee but I don't want 0% moisture. I don't want to get all the way
down there. That's dangerous and undesirable. So I add back about 12%. So
these are all approximations. So I'm adding back 12-ish so I know what I
I don't want to go below.
I know that I want to keep it--
I'm starting at 1,900.
I don't want to get below 1,178, because then I'm
going to get too dry and potentially have other issues.
So if I take my starting weight and I remove my coffee weight,
I know that I want to lose 800 grams, mostly water.
So we did this.
And because I didn't have a moisture meter at the time,
once a week, we would go to the co-op in San Juanio,
we're just kind of check to see how we were going along because it's not again
We're just kind of guessing in general like directional and then checking because that was free with this instrument
Well, that's a thousand dollars. The other one is 250. So these are super accessible, but not that
Not that accurate this one's better but it's more expensive
You producers who have this piece of equipment?
That's the one they had up at the farm, right?
Is that one?
Yeah.
Yes.
And do you know?
So do they do that because milling and roasting themselves, is it as important even though?
Like, or if they're going to roast right away, does the good accuracy of that matter as much?
It doesn't.
You're right, because they are roasting their own coffee.
So this is a measurement for longevity and stability when you're going to send your coffee
far away.
If you're going to roast your own coffee, it also matters if as a producer you're getting
paid.
The more water you have, like if you sell coffee at 13%, you're selling more water,
more weight, you get more money.
If you dry that coffee down to 11, then you make less money as a producer because you're
being, you're selling by weight.
So there's this tension between producers want to sell coffee as wet as possible because
you make more money but that puts it in risk of mold and damage and long-term
storage. You have experience.
I have. We had one.
No, I mean, I don't know.
This is a black lady, a Czech lady. She's working in Nicaragua.
We work with her as well and she also exports coffee in the United States.
And she has a client who requires her to dry the coffee to 9.5%
And I was telling her that she's basically losing a lot of money.
She's losing a lot of money.
And she was like, yeah, but our clients, like, she had this completely that way because they believe that they receive very good quality
and they're not afraid that they'll go out, whatever.
Yeah, and then, you know, you are literally talking about how you can try to perceive the quality for a longer term.
Yeah.
Yeah, and the customer obviously doesn't have the information,
and they are directly saying what they should do.
Yeah.
I mean, that is really shameful, that a customer is saying,
dry the coffee this much, because not only are they
paying less for it, because they are taking away
that opportunity for water, which the standard is 11 and 1/2.
So to ask for 2% less is a lot of weight, a lot of money
that the producer is losing.
And we do want moisture.
The roaster reactions need water to bring out these flavors.
So drying too low is also not a good idea for either of them.
[INAUDIBLE]
But I wanted to ask, do you know, for example,
in the pubs, they have to do recalibration for free?
Or is there any options here in Columbia?
Because I saw often that people have the meter just
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah, they don't know how to calibrate it.
Exactly.
And then it gets too expensive, and you stop using it.
No, 100%.
So it's like I mentioned earlier.
Don't have a pH meter if you're not going to have buffers.
A pH meter without buffers is worthless.
This instrument without the moisture--
this guy-- the humidity meter without--
without calibration is also pretty pointless and can send you in the wrong
direction doing a bunch of extra work that is unnecessary. So at least here in
in the co-op that we were in San Juario, they give out moisture so like this is a
12% sample so you go back to your machine. So it may not be the most
accurate but at least you're calibrated to the co-op and then when you're
selling your coffee, you at least be calibrated with them. So I'm not saying
even their samples are the most accurate, but at least you can sort of be talking
the same language. So when we got our moisture meter, we get samples from
them every couple of weeks and then we check and then we're calibrated to that.
So the sample that you did by mass, is that a sample you just keep in that smaller
container, does it dry at the same rate? It doesn't because by being isolated it was like in a little
thinner layer so it's still a guide. You still have to do your best to try and make it in the
same conditions but I don't think that it is in the same conditions and that's small. The same
thing with our bucket. There's always a problem when you're looking at a small sample of something
and then trying to say something about a bigger sample. All I can say is this sample is at that
that percent, but it was right next to the other coffee.
So again, it's like, how comfortable do you feel?
Like that's for everyone to have their own level of like,
I feel pretty good, or I don't feel that confident
if I didn't do something else.
So yeah, small scale to full scale is always a challenge.
But again, this was a guide and it's mostly
to show producers like, don't think that you're increasing,
you may not be increasing moisture,
you may not have the problem that you think you have.
And don't try to solve something
that is actually not a problem.
So for that, we did--
so we just guessed.
If I'm starting at around 45%, this is my day,
this is my dates, my sample at 1914,
guessing 45%, my dry coffee mass,
and then what my water was.
So we were just tracking it every day, trying to see,
make sure that the curve was downward, just losing water.
That was my goal.
and to eventually get down to 11.7.
And we had, in general, a downward trend.
And we had this bump up in these days, 20, 21, and then 25,
or 26, where we actually went back up.
So in those situations, I do think
we were taking on more moisture from the environment.
I think that, especially as we get more dry,
we're putting more energy to remove this water.
I think it's kind of like a rubber band,
like you're kind of snapping it,
and it's a little bit more greedy,
like if there is a lot of moisture in the air,
to kind of take it back up again.
So, in this situation,
it is possible that your coffee can re-humidify,
I just don't think it's as common
as most producers think that it is.
- So, no matter the humidity,
you can eventually lose all that moisture?
It just takes longer?
Or is there like an equilibrium where it just--
- There's definitely an equilibrium
when you can't, like if you're at 100% humidity in your air,
even with time and heat, there's still that tendency.
So yes, it does get very difficult.
There's some coffees that just don't go below 14
and you have to take them somewhere else.
They can hit that limit.
- I've found that the drier the coffee gets,
the harder it is to dry it.
- Yes.
It wants to hold on to that water at the end,
more and more and more.
- The last two, three, after 13%,
to get to 311, it's like you have to struggle.
- Yes, exactly.
The first 15% are easy, and then the last
are just holding on tight.
Which is why people then want to put it in the machine
'cause they get impatient, and then you did all
of that beautiful work, and then with that impatience,
you can really damage it.
- I'll project your condition in the machine.
(laughing)
- So this is another picture of the coffee drying
at our house.
We were just trying to find any bit of sun,
And even this was a cloudy day.
It took a long time, and it was very hard.
So here you can see our little sample
running in that corner.
So again, it's like that guessing of,
we were just measuring that sample,
but it was right next to the other copy.
We tried to make it a similar layer.
But if you can get a bigger sample, it's a better--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
There's just some wood frame.
Do we keep it separate?
The same tables.
Yeah, the same tables.
So water activity is well-established in other foods,
but very new to coffee.
So it's a little bit the same story with coffee with bricks,
where bricks is used in a lot of other industries.
It's a super important measurement.
It gives us a lot of information.
And then we borrowed it to coffee,
and then just kind of like bungled the whole thing.
So I think water activity is a similar thing,
or we are borrowing it from another industry,
we don't really understand it.
And then we're kind of like bungling it up
in terms of copy, like making guidelines
that we don't have a lot of foundation for.
So it is important because it's why food gets mold and spoiled.
It lets us know--
it gives us an idea about predicting shelf life,
how long this is going to last, which
is important for exporters and importers and roasters.
So yeah, avoiding premature decline.
But the water migration is not fully understood.
We've already talked about this moving target.
So we know that the sea is porous.
We know there's some capillary action.
We know that it could be caused by liquid diffusion.
It's not one mechanism.
There's a lot of things working together
for this water, which, again, makes it difficult at the end.
Some water is more tightly bound.
Some water is more free.
So this is just to tell you that water activity is still
in development in terms of its usefulness for coffee.
And water is important for both of these things,
for biological activity, right?
Organism growth, like we need water
to create these reactions, like mold and fade.
But chemical reactions need water too.
So even if you have a completely sterile environment
and there's no more microbes present,
you can still have chemical reactions
that can combine and oxidize and have different flavor
components.
So the availability of water is still really important,
but water activity doesn't tell us the whole story.
So the point of this is just to say
water is important for biological and chemical
reactions.
And usually you don't want to have hot water.
So in the way that we measure it,
moisture content, our range is 10.5 to 12.
So I'm surprised to hear this 9.5.
It's even outside of the recommended bounds.
And moisture content deals with how much water do we have.
We have 12%.
We have 10%.
And water actually means, well, how much of that water
is available?
What is the energy of that water?
What is the potential of that water?
Because just because we have it doesn't
mean it's readily available.
And that scale is a 0 to 1.
And what we want in Coffee, our recommendation is pretty broad.
0.5 to 0.6.
It seems small, but it's actually a pretty broad range.
[INAUDIBLE]
Like 6.65 or like just 60?
Because, for example, I saw a lot of coffee
[INAUDIBLE]
Everything below 7, basically.
Right, so we're going to see--
we'll go here.
So the thing-- yeah, is this green coffee or parchment?
Green.
Green coffee.
So what's important to see is that these are two water
and coffee and they don't perfectly correlate.
There's this curve, so where we want to be here
is like 0.5 to 0.6 for coffee, and we can see that
above that we have mold growth, yeast growth,
we have bacteria, so we definitely want to be
below seven for sure.
And then like how much more, like here you can see
mold growth at 0.6, so you can still have some activity.
But if we go too far, like we need this amount of water
for our browning reactions, so if we just think
like more is better, drier is better, more stable,
then you don't have your water available
when you're, where you roast.
So you definitely want to have this like balance of,
I don't want so much water
that I have microbial growth and mold,
but I need some water so that I can have a good roast
and develop my flavors.
And the point is that you see this curve,
it's not a linear relationship,
meaning that you can have the same moisture content
and two different water activities,
Or-- here, I actually shot that.
So this is from the Cafe Imports study of water activity.
I think they were just looking at water activity for six
years for a really long time, just constantly
collecting this measurement of all of these copies
that came to them.
And they created this curve.
And here are two scenarios.
So we have this copy over here, that my moisture content is
11.7.
That's a good moisture content.
That's within range.
But I can have two very different water activities.
This is one of the comparisons that they found.
So out of this, I would rather have this coffee.
I would rather have this moisture content
and a lower water activity, just because it gives this sense
of security.
I have a little less potential for something to happen.
But conversely, if I have a single water activity
measurement, 6.61, and I have these two kind of moisture readings, this is again
where a producer can lose money in terms of if they're drying more than they need
to. If their coffee at 12.8 has this water activity, they can be paid for 1%
more of that weight. But if you're just by drying it more, doesn't necessarily
mean you're going to get lower water activity. So that's not a good
correlation. So this is confusing. It's just to say it's not a good correlation.
It's not a really straightforward connection and we want to like put
guidelines before we've really figured this out. And one of the things that came
up in the last session, Fernando was sharing that in one of the competitions
is a cup of excellence. In cup of excellence he was sharing that when they
receive samples, the judges or the panel is measuring the water activity and if
if it's out of bounds, they reject your coffee.
And they say, you can't compete or dry better.
And this is also a moving target, like bricks.
So we said bricks changes if you measure it in the day
or at night, if you measure it with a full moon
or a new moon, like bricks is a moving target
depending on when you catch it.
And so is water activity.
Water activity will depend on when you're measuring it.
So to make like a competition rule
based on a moving target is really unfair.
To punish producers for this thing
that we don't even really understand is very coffee.
But it's also really frustrating.
And so this information-- so this
is a study that Ian did for Peff Aports.
So 25,000 samples, 44 different countries.
Most of them were washed.
19% of them were from Colombia, and they
didn't do monsoon, decaffeinated,
or robusta coffees.
And these were like some of-- so this is like an 80-page report
that is free on their website, and you can read it,
and it's fantastic.
I really recommend it.
But the things that stuck out to me
is like six years of work, 25,000 samples,
and it's sort of like moisture content is
neither a perfect nor terrible predictor of water activity.
So this is sort of like--
a lot of the conversation in the industry was like,
should we ignore moisture content
and just move to water activity?
We have this romance of getting more tools and more toys.
And this number is more accurate.
This number is a better number.
And his study of all these years and all these samples is,
well, it's not a bad number, but it's not a better option.
We shouldn't just abandon our moisture content
and everybody move to water activity.
we're not there yet, and it's a moving target.
And one of the things we talked about in the last session,
too, is that this information was collected
after the coffee had already been shipped
and arrived in the United States,
arrived in their facilities.
So we don't really know the life of that coffee
or how it was dried.
It would be more useful to do this analysis at origin
with producers to say, to measure it several times.
So exactly like we did with pH, I'm
not going to say pH 4 is better or 4.5.
I want to know the change.
I want to know my curve.
I want to know where I started and where I ended up.
And water activity could be way more useful in that sense,
seeing several data points over the life of the coffee,
not one data point when it gets to its destination.
And then we make a decision about it,
or we punish producers for doing a bad job because their water
activity is high.
or telling them to change something.
- What would it be?
- Water?
- Water, water activity?
You're talking about like ideally measuring it
over the shelf life of the coffee?
- Or while it's being produced.
So like let's measure the water activity
right now when it gets off of the bed.
And to say like, well what is it?
Maybe it's at .9.
And then measuring it like during its life stage of drying.
To get to a final number at the end of drying.
And then maybe to see how much it changes
when it's on the container ship, if it takes six months
and it's at the top container in a very hot route
or if it's in the bottom or something like that.
It's just so incomplete, we have so little data,
but coffee's ready to put mandates
and say producers can't compete or this coffee's bad
or you need to change something.
We just don't have enough information.
- Any water, I think the measurements that are taken
during green storage, post-receiving,
would that fluctuate based on environmental factors as well?
- I think so.
I think it definitely could.
- So at that point, it's like the roaster
or the importer's--
- Responsibility.
- Yeah, potential.
- So the day of point, the moving target
is important before that point, after that point,
the producer and the exporter really have nothing,
The moving target importance for a producer's standpoint is before it goes on the container.
Well, I mean it matters to both of them.
Because again, if we're going to start...
Something that we could see potentially is deciding to pay more or less for a coffee based on this number.
So thinking that a lower number would be a more stable coffee
and saying, "Well, I'm gonna pay a premium for copies that are more stable, because that is valuable to me."
Which sounds like a great idea, like to reward a producer saying, "You've created a more stable copy."
But the other side of that is like, well then you necessarily are punishing someone who doesn't hit that mark.
And it's not a consistent mark. We don't know if it's even that useful.
So, yeah, what I'm trying to just communicate is that the trend is let's get rid of moisture
content and let's focus more on water activity, which is a similar mistake that we made with
BRICS, where we said, no, stop using your eyes to look at maturity.
Let's use BRICS.
Let's use numbers.
Let's use instruments.
Let's be advanced.
And it hasn't led us in a good direction with BRICS, and I think with water activity, we
are in danger of making the same mistakes.
I'm not saying it's not useful.
I'm saying it's not telling us what we think it's telling us.
Yeah, the same as like, you don't do it in origin.
You mostly do it in the consumer's country.
You do it in the consumer countries
because this instrument is so expensive.
So a scale is like $20 to measure
how much water you're losing.
$250 for that instrument, which we said,
comes out of calibration.
It's not great, but it gives you another layer.
The $1,000 one is better.
It's a much larger sample.
You can do parchment.
People like it.
And then Wateritudy's $4,000 minimum.
This is the cheapest unit you can find that is reliable.
They go up to $10,000.
So no producer is going to spend that money on one tool,
unless maybe you are a co-op and you're 50 producers that
can use the instrument.
And so it's more of a thing that importers use or roasters can afford this piece of equipment.
And it's also really time consuming.
It can take up to 20 minutes to do one sample.
And if you're going to look at all of your coffees, there's a lot of barriers to using
this piece of equipment.
And it's sort of this idea of like, well, who can afford it?
And then we're using the coffee that's already at destination.
It makes me think of that, what is that joke about there's like a drunk guy under the streetlight
and he's looking for his keys and someone comes to help him and he's like, "Oh, where did you lose them?"
And he's like, "Over there." And he's like, "Well, why are you over here?"
And he's like, "Well, this is where the light is."
So he's looking over here where the light is, but that's not where the problem is.
We do this so much. It's way more useful at Origin to give us information about how to process coffee,
but it's not where the light is. The money is on the other side. The coffee's already gotten there.
So it's just like, again, a very coffee thing to do.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
So now we're leaving that topic and we're just talking very quickly,
unfortunately, about wastewater treatment.
Unfortunately, because it's a really important topic, and
it's a very impactful topic.
But there's also very little information about this,
why wastewater is important.
And not having a huge or a very strong culture of treating coffee wastewater,
because it is mostly small producers, especially here in Colombia.
And as you guys already saw, there's a pulper that was pulled straight into
the river.
That is the standard of not necessarily thinking about the downstream
effects of our actions in the mill.
Question?
No.
OK.
So--
Frustration.
The question a lot of the times is like,
well, what's so bad about it?
Like if it's gonna get diluted,
if there's kind of this thinking of like,
well, it's just small producers,
little bits of coffee,
like what I do doesn't really matter in the whole.
When if everybody felt that way,
we would kind of have the world that we have now.
Like, it doesn't matter what I do.
I'm just like one little person.
But this wastewater is so toxic.
Like the thing that makes our coffee taste good
is so toxic to the environment.
three main reasons. One, we, as we saw and measured, it's an anaerobic environment. There
is little to no oxygen in that liquid. It's really acidic, very, very high acid, so it's
corroding. And three, it still had a lot of breaks that we measured. There's a lot of
sugar in this water. So, even though it's liquid, when you add it to any type of biological
or any type of living environment, it's going to suck all of that oxygen and it's going
to suffocate whatever's there.
So that's where you kill plants and fish
by just dumping this water.
So it's very important to treat this water
and to not treat it like it's just a liquid
that you can get away with.
So yeah, it's a very hostile environment.
So we've talked a little bit about needing
to treat the water and having these steps.
Like the main things that we wanna do
and having these levels is re-aerating,
like reintroducing air into this medium
before it can safely go on.
So Cecil showed us all of his levels of ponds, the reeds,
and then the aquatic plants, and then the fish,
the proof of life that this very low oxygen,
this anaerobic water can support life again
and is able to be drunk.
So, but it's still, you know, the system cleans up to 80%.
We're still not at 100.
We've reduced the toxicity significantly,
but it can still be a problem if we don't go
a little bit further than just like,
this is just like FNC guidelines for the country.
Another thing that we started to see with Caleb's example
is with your pulp.
So there's two of the main waste streams is your solids
with your pulp and your husks and your liquids
from your fermentation.
So being able to combine them, being
able to use your fermentation liquid with your solids
to help start to break down and compost your solids
is a good idea, combining these two things.
One of the things that maybe, Julie, you
can weigh in on a little bit that I see super, super common
here in Colombia is taking the pulp from a pulped coffee,
the skins, and just putting them immediately back
into the field.
I don't think that's a great practice.
You still have all of that sugar.
You have all of that charge.
And I think in some instances, the concentration
is just really high, and you could burn the coffee.
Alternatively, I think you're inviting possibly more
And then two, if you let it decompose for a little while and then put it out, you're
significantly increasing your C to N ratio.
So you want to start with a low carbon to nitrogen ratio in your organic matter.
And just putting something with a high nitrogen ratio will actually leach nitrogen from the
plant.
And so like when you throw wood chips down, for example, sometimes in addition to the
wood chips, you can put a little bit of sugar in there.
And that's a good way to start.
And then three, if you let it decompose for a little while and then put it out, you're
significantly increasing your C to N ratio.
So you want to start with a low carbon to nitrogen ratio in your organic matter.
And just putting something with a high nitrogen ratio will actually leach nitrogen from the
plant.
And so like when you throw wood chips down, for example, sometimes in addition to the wood
matter and just putting something with a high nitrogen ratio will actually leach nitrogen
from the plant. And so like when you throw wood chips down for example, sometimes initially
plants look a little bit more unhealthy, but letting it break down and mineralize a little
first and letting it become plants available before putting it around the plant actually
increases the nutrient availability you're getting from that product. So I definitely
I think letting it break down a little bit first is way better.
Right, so we're also making all the nutrients more
bioavailable, right?
Like, you have these big pieces, and by composting,
you make them more easily digestible,
like cooking your food.
So I think that's a really difficult way that I--
it's just a culture thing here.
Like, even Humberto, who actually
had a very healthy farm, you could
see compared to his neighbors.
He was showing his pictures of the leaves.
That's his practice, and he's so proud of it.
He's like, I don't let a day go by.
He's like, I don't let a moment-- as soon as we bolt,
we put it right back on the field.
He's like, I wish you could just break it down a little bit more.
And he had all of his husks from-- because he mills--
he dry mills, so he has all of that carbon available.
And he just keeps them separated.
And I'm like, ooh, this is a great opportunity.
But so again, it's hard to--
I never give advice to anyone who doesn't ask.
And he's never asked, so it's not my place.
Then we had another question from Alejandra
in the other session, and she said,
"If I'm adding yeast, or if we're doing this lactic process
"in our fermentation, is that going to affect
"my wastewater treatment?"
Because she does this process,
she has the FNC tanks system,
and they buy microbes, they buy like,
she shared this in the group,
digestion microbes so they buy these and then they add them to help break down
your their waste. So I mentioned that you know it's hard to tell because anytime
you're introducing a new organism it's a little bit unpredictable but I pointed
out to her that in the thing that she's already buying it comes with Saccharomyces
serratusii and it also has Lactobacillus already in it. So what I've seen in some
places is that by doing this type of fermentation and inoculating or
encouraging these organisms, you can buy less of your treatment organisms because we're
like pre-inoculating.
So it can be beneficial in two ways.
You get more interesting complex fermentation and then downstream your wastewater is already
inoculated and it can turn them out.
So I said, I've worked in a place in El Salvador where this wasn't the intention and they told
me like a year later, they're like, "Oh, by the way, like we don't have to buy the microbes
anymore because they just completely changed over to like a SEMA and the
Oro protocol so they were treating all of their mostly like 80% of their
coffee was going through this process so they noticed a huge reduction in the
microbes that they needed to purchase. So you know it's one of those things like
if you're already buying microbes to decompose your pulp, if you just like go a
little bit earlier you can take advantage of the flavor benefits and the
mechanical parts. And I said, however, with our salts solution, we are adding
salt. Salt is inhibitory, so it could be that that could negatively impact and
maybe she would need to add more microbes. So it's hard to say if you're
gonna disrupt something, but in most of what I've seen in this system, it just
helps. Like you already want these microbes to break down, so
adding them in your fermentation tank is not going to be a problem. If you're
We're already buying them here. Don't buy them twice.
Voice water questions?
Because that's it you guys. You did it.
That's all I have for you.
Thank you.
So now, we're packed.
Oh, have we talked about the coffee?
I'll ask Nick because the coffee that's on the bed is available for you guys to take home some parchment, finish drying, and roast.
But it's for Stibbs, so whoever can fill their bag full first.
Put it in your pocket.
But is there some question there?
What did we talk about?
I broke some marriage.
One once.
(crowd chatter)
- Stickers.
Anyone want a sticker?
Anyone?
- Yeah, for the stickers, maybe we can get like a sister.
- Okay, I'll get a sister.
- You're just gonna start stopping on everyone's shirt?
tote bag? What's the search size? Small. Can I have the shirt?
I have more coffee if any were want.
What's that?
- Very good.
- What's that?
[ Background Discussions ]